The Indian Penal Code (IPC) is the official criminal code of India. It is a comprehensive code intended to cover all substantive aspects of criminal law. Drafted in 1860 on the recommendations of the first law commission of India established in 1834 under the Charter Act of 1833 under the Chairmanship of Lord Macaulay, it came into force in British India during the early British Raj period in 1862.

The Code has since been amended several times and is now supplemented by other criminal provisions. It consists of 23 chapters and 511 sections.

Section 302 - Punishment for Murder:
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 375 - Rape:
A man is said to commit “rape” if he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman, without her consent, or with her consent under coercion or misrepresentation.

Section 124A - Sedition:
Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the government established by law in India shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which a fine may be added.

Section 420 - Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property:
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person shall be punished with imprisonment of up to 7 years and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 376 - Punishment for Rape:
Whoever, commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of not less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 498A - Cruelty by husband or relatives:
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects her to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 354 - Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty:
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of up to 2 years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 307 - Attempt to Murder:
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 10 years and shall also be liable to fine. If hurt is caused, the punishment may extend to life imprisonment.

Section 509 - Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman:
Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine.

Section 295 - Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult the religion of any class:
Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held sacred by any class of persons, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 304B - Dowry Death:
Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within 7 years of her marriage and it is shown that she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called “dowry death”, and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Section 153A - Promoting enmity between different groups:
Whoever promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., enmity between different groups, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 34 - Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention:
When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.

Section 11 - Person:
The word “person” includes any Company or Association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not.

Section 21 - Public Servant:
The term “public servant” includes any person who is in the service or pay of the government, or remunerated by fees or commission for the performance of any public duty.

Section 44 - Injury:
The word “injury” denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation or property.

Section 76 - Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law:
Nothing is an offense which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.

Section 80 - Accident in doing a lawful act:
Nothing is an offense which is done by accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention, in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution.

Section 84 - Act of a person of unsound mind:
Nothing is an offense which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law, due to unsoundness of mind.

Section 95 - Act causing slight harm:
Nothing is an offense by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.
